I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little-death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when it has gone past I will turn the inner eye to see its path. Where the fear has gone there will be nothing. Only I will remain.
Deep in the human unconscious is a pervasive need for a logical universe that makes sense. But the real universe is always one step beyond logic.
What do you despise? By this are you truly known.
This wise man observed that wealth is a tool of freedom. But the pursuit of wealth is the way to slavery.
Night held its fear smells and its things which came with slithering sounds.
Enemies strengthen you. Allies weaken you.
When I am weaker than you, I ask you for freedom because that is according to your principles; when I am stronger than you, I take away your freedom because that is according to my principles.
The slow knife penetrates the shield.
It is said that there is a principle of conflict which originated with the single cell and has never deteriorated.
To know the future absolutely is to be trapped into that future absolutely. It collapses time. Present becomes future.
The act of saying that things exist that cannot be described in words shakes a universe where words are the supreme belief.
Time is a measure of space, just as a range-finder is a measure of space, but measuring locks us into the place we measure.
No matter how much we ask after the truth, self-awareness is often unpleasant. We do not feel kindly toward the Truthsayer.
The ultimate test... to see the good in evil and the evil in good.
Evil can be detected by its smell.
Silence is often the best thing to say.
Order generally was a product of human activity. Chaos existed as a raw material from which to create order.
Revenge is for children and the emotionally retarded.
Logic is good for playing chess but is often too slow for the needs of survival.
Unused power was like a marionette with visible strings, nobody holding them. A compelling attraction: I could make it dance.
Paired opposites define your longings and those longings imprison you.
What greater gift is there than to demonstrate you need not fear death?
Words themselves were the ultimate barrier to revelation.
Death makes a prophet's voice louder.
What do such machines really do? They increase the number of things we can do without thinking. Things we do without thinking - there's the real danger.
Constitutions become the ultimate tyranny... They're organized power on such a scale as to be overwhelming. The constitution is social power mobilized and it has no conscience. It can crush the highest and the lowest, removing all dignity and individuality. It has an unstable balance point and no limitations.
War is behavior with roots in the single cell of the primeval seas. Eat whatever you touch or it will eat you.
Politics: the art of appearing candid and completely open while concealing as much as possible.
Face your fears or they will climb over your back.
Try to hold on to youth and it mocks you while it sprints away.
Give me the judgment of balanced minds in preference to laws every time. Codes and manuals create patterned behavior. All patterned behavior tends to go unquestioned, gathering destructive momentum.
The oppressed always learned from and copied the oppressor. When the tables were turned, the stage was set for another round of revenge and violence - roles reversed. And reversed and reversed ad nauseam.
Ask what Infinity might produce and the only answer possible was, "Anything." Any good, any evil; any god, any devil.
Power attracts the corruptible. Suspect all who seek it.
The surest way to keep a secret is to make people believe they already know the answer.
Police always observe that criminals prosper. It takes a pretty dull policeman to miss the fact that the position of authority is the most prosperous criminal position available.
Life cannot find reasons to sustain it, cannot be a source of decent mutual regard, unless each of us resolves to breathe such qualities into it.
Law always chooses sides on the basis of enforcement power. Morality and legal niceties have little to do with it when the real question is: Who has the clout?
We never completely escape the teachers of our childhood nor any of the patterns that formed us.
Bureaucracy destroys initiative. There is little that bureaucrats hate more than innovation, especially innovation that produces better results than the old routines. Improvements always make those at the top of the heap look inept. Who enjoys appearing inept?
Justice? Who asks for justice? We make our own justice... Let us not rail about justice as long as we have arms and the freedom to use them.
Caution is the path to mediocrity. Gliding passionless mediocrity is all that most people think they can achieve.
Some people never observe anything. Life just happens to them. They get by on little more than a kind of dumb persistence, and they resist with anger and resentment anything that might lift them out of that false serenity.
Philosophy is always dangerous because it promotes the creation of new ideas.
Producing perfection from imperfection is, after all, the highest of art forms.
“Time can also be a place, Moneo," Leto said. "Everything depends upon where you are standing, on where you look or what you hear. The measure of it is found in consciousness itself.”
Historians exercise great power and some of them know it. They recreate the past, changing it to fit their own interpretations. Thus, they change the future as well.
Fragmentation is the natural destiny of all power.
In all major socializing forces you will find an underlying movement to gain and maintain power through the use of words. From witch doctor to priest to bureaucrat it is all the same. A governed populace must be conditioned to accept power-words as actual things, to confuse the symbolized system with the tangible universe. In the maintenance of such a power structure, certain symbols are kept out of reach of common understanding - symbols such as those dealing with economic manipulation or those which define the local interpretation of sanity. Symbol-secrecy of this form leads to the development of fragmented sub-languages, each being a signal that its users are accumulating some form of power.
Justice required resort to law and that could be a fickle mistress, subject always to the whims and prejudices of those who administered the laws.
Atrocity is recognized as such by victim and perpetrator alike, by all who learn about it at whatever remove. Atrocity has no excuses, no mitigating argument. Atrocity never balances or rectifies the past. Atrocity merely arms the future for more atrocity. It is self-perpetuating upon itself - a barbarous form of incest. Whoever commits atrocity also commits those future atrocities thus bred.
Governments, if they endure, always tend increasingly toward aristocratic forms. No government in history has been known to evade this pattern. And as the aristocracy develops, governments tend more and more to act exclusively in the interests of the ruling class - whether that class be hereditary royalty, oligarchs of financial empires, or entrenched bureaucracy.
Most civilization is based on cowardice. It's so easy to civilize by teaching cowardice. You water down the standards which would lead to bravery. You restrain the will. You regulate the appetites. You fence in the horizons. You make a law for every movement. You deny the existence of chaos. You teach even the children to breathe slowly. You tame.
One must cast off old agonies as a snake casts off its skin - only to grow a new set and accept all of their limitations.
There is no escape — we pay for the violence of our ancestors.
If we deny the need for thought, Moneo, as some do, we lose the powers of reflection; we cannot define what our senses report. If we deny the flesh, we unwheel the vehicle which bears us. But if we deny emotion, we lose all touch with our internal universe. It was emotions which I missed the most.
Infinity? It attracts us like a floodlight in the night.
Only gods can safely risk perfection... it's a dangerous thing for a man.
Words are such gross machinery, so primitive and ambiguous.
When religion and politics travel in the same cart, the riders believe nothing can stand in their way. Their movements become headlong - faster and faster and faster. They put aside all thoughts of obstacles and forget the precipice does not show itself to the man in a blind rush until it's too late.
Hope clouds observation.
It is impossible to live in the past, difficult to live in the present and a waste to live in the future.
The mind can go either direction under stress — toward positive or toward negative: on or off. Think of it as a spectrum whose extremes are unconsciousness at the negative end and hyperconsciousness at the positive end. The way the mind will lean under stress is strongly influenced by training.
He who controls the spice controls the universe.
Without change, something sleeps inside us, and seldom awakens. The sleeper must awaken.
A process cannot be understood by stopping it. Understanding must move with the flow of the process, must join it and flow with it.
Fear is the mind-killer.
We tend to become like the worst in those we oppose.
The mind goes on working no matter how we try to hold it back.
The unclouded eye was better, no matter what it saw.
Each life creates endless ripples.
Short-term expediency always fails in the long run.
Humiliation is a thing which no person can forget.
You were taught to believe that loyalty buys loyalty. Ohh, Duncan, do not believe in history, because history is impelled by whatever passes for money.
Greatness is a transitory experience. It is never consistent. It depends in part upon the myth-making imagination of humankind. The person who experiences greatness must have a feeling for the myth he is in. He must reflect what is projected upon him. And he must have a strong sense of the sardonic. This is what uncouples him from belief in his own pretensions. The sardonic is all that permits him to move within himself. Without this quality, even occasional greatness will destroy a man.
Once men turned their thinking over to machines in the hope that this would set them free. But that only permitted other men with machines to enslave them.
The people who can destroy a thing, they control it.
The dice cannot read their own spots.
Survival is the ability to swim in strange water.
It is by will alone I set my mind in motion.
Try looking into that place where you dare not look! You'll find me there, staring out at you!
Expect only what happens in the fight. That way you'll never be surprised.
People are the true strength of a Great House.
Arrakis teaches the attitude of the knife - chopping off what's incomplete and saying: "Now, it's complete because it's ended here."
What has mood to do with it? You fight when the necessity arises — no matter the mood! Mood's a thing for cattle or making love or playing the baliset. It's not for fighting.
Whether a thought is spoken or not it is a real thing and it has power," Tuek said. "You might find the line between life and death among the Fremen to be too sharp and quick.
Grave this on your memory, lad: A world is supported by four things..." she held up four big-knuckled fingers. "...the learning of the wise, the justice of the great, the prayers of the righteous and the valor of the brave. But all of these things are as nothing..." She closed her fingers into a fist. "...without a ruler who knows the art of ruling. Make that the science of your tradition!
The Fremen were supreme in that quality the ancients called "spannungsbogen" - which is the self-imposed delay between desire for a thing and the act of reaching out to grasp that thing.
Highly organized research is guaranteed to produce nothing new.
Any road followed precisely to its end leads precisely nowhere. Climb the mountain just a little bit to test that it's a mountain. From the top of the mountain, you cannot see the mountain.
There should be a science of discontent. People need hard times to develop psychic muscles.
The willow submits to the wind and prospers until one day it is many willows - a wall against the wind. This is the willow's purpose.
There is probably no more terrible instant of enlightenment than the one in which you discover your father is a man - with human flesh.
The child who refuses to travel in the father's harness, this is the symbol of man's most unique capability. 'I do not have to be what my father was. I do not have to obey my father's rules or even believe everything he believed. It is my strength as a human that I can make my own choices of what to believe and what not to believe, of what to be and what not to be.'
“Give as few orders as possible," his father had told him once long ago. "Once you've given orders on a subject, you must always give orders on that subject.”
My father once told me that respect for truth comes close to being the basis for all morality. "Something cannot emerge from nothing," he said. This is profound thinking if you understand how unstable 'the truth' can be.
There is in all things a pattern that is part of our universe. It has symmetry, elegance, and grace - these qualities you find always in that the true artist captures. You can find it in the turning of the seasons, the way sand trails along a ridge, in the branch clusters of the creosote bush of the pattern of its leaves. We try to copy these patterns in our lives and in our society, seeking the rhythms, the dances, the forms that comfort. Yet, it is possible to see peril in the finding of ultimate perfection. It is clear that the ultimate pattern contains its own fixity. In such perfection, all things move towards death.
Beyond a critical point within a finite space, freedom diminishes as numbers increase. This is as true of humans as it is of gas molecules in a sealed flask. The human question is not how many can possibly survive within the system, but what kind of existence is possible for those who so survive.
The concept of progress acts as a protective mechanism to shield us from the terrors of the future.
Any man who retreats into a cave which has only one opening deserves to die.
Humans must never submit to animals.
How often it is that the angry man rages denial of what his inner self is telling him.
Do you wrestle with dreams? Do you contend with shadows? Do you move in a kind of sleep? Time has slipped away. Your life is stolen. You tarried with trifles, Victim of your folly.
We faced it and did not resist. The storm passed through us and around us. It's gone, but we remain.
Anything outside yourself, this you can see and apply your logic to it. But it's a human trait that when we encounter personal problems, these things most deeply personal are the most difficult to bring out for our logic to scan. We tend to flounder around, blaming everything but the actual, deep-seated thing that's really chewing on us.
A killer with the manners of a rabbit - this is the most dangerous kind.
Then, as his planet killed him, it occurred to Kynes that his father and all the other scientists were wrong, that the most persistent principles of the universe were accident and error.
But it's well known that repression makes a religion flourish.
Religion must remain an outlet for people who say to themselves, 'I am not the kind of person I want to be.' It must never sink into an assemblage of the self-satisfied.
Knowing where the trap is — that's the first step in evading it.
To endure oneself may be the hardest task in the universe.
When a creature has developed into one thing, he will choose death rather than change into his opposite.
I don't speak... I operate a machine called language. It creaks and groans, but is mine own.
How easy it is to mistake clear reasoning from correct reasoning!
Here lies a toppled god. His fall was not a small one. We did but build his pedestal. A narrow and a tall one.
All governments suffer a recurring problem: Power attracts pathological personalities. It is not that power corrupts but that it is magnetic to the corruptible. Such people have a tendency to become drunk on violence, a condition to which they are quickly addicted.
"Every judgement teeters on the brink of error," Leto explained. "To claim absolute knowledge is to become monstrous. Knowledge is an unending adventure on the edge of uncertainty."
Show me a completely smooth operation and I'll show you someone who's covering mistakes. Real boats rock.
Your semen is your own, to do with as you please.
There's a lesson in every temptation.
One observes the survivors and learns from them.
When we try to conceal our innermost drives, the entire being screams betrayal.
Men always fear things which move by themselves.
Words can carry any burden we wish. All that's required is agreement and a tradition upon which to build.
Too much knowledge never makes for simple decisions.
Ambitions tend to remain undisturbed by realities.
If you live in bad faith, lies will appear to you like the truth.
It is not the present which unfluences the future, thou fool, but the future which forms the present. You have it all backward. Since the future is set, an unfolding of events which will assure that future is fixed and inevitable.
We sift people to find the humans.
If wishes were fishes, we'd all cast nets.
Seek freedom and become captive of your desires. Seek discipline and find your liberty.
People, not commercial organizations or chains of command, are what make great civilizations work. Every civilization depends upon the quality of the individuals it produces. If you over-organize humans, over-legalize them, suppress their urge to greatness — they cannot work and their civilization collapses.
If I am the flame, be the coal. If I am the dew, be the water.
You see, gentlemen, they have something to die for. They've discovered they're a people. They're awakening.
Many have marked the speed with which Muad'Dib learned the necessities of Arrakis. The Bene Gesserit, of course, know the basis of this speed. For the others, we can say that Muad'Dib learned rapidly because his first training was in how to learn. And the first lesson of all was the basic trust that he could learn. It is shocking to find how many people do not believe they can learn, and how many more believe learning to be difficult. Muad'Dib knew that every experience carries its lesson.
What senses do we lack that we cannot see or hear another world all around us?
Much that was called religion has carried an unconscious attitude of hostility toward life. True religion must teach that life is filled with joys pleasing to the eye of God, that knowledge without action is empty. All men must see that the teaching of religion by rules and rote is largely a hoax. The proper teaching is recognized with ease. You can know it without fail because it awakens within you that sensation which tells you this is something you've always known.
Thou shalt not make a machine in the likeness of a human mind.
Thou shalt not make a machine to counterfeit a human mind.
A requirement of creativity is that it contributes to change. Creativity keeps the creator alive.
Confine yourself to observing and you always miss the point of your own life. The object can be stated this way: Live the best life you can. Life is a game whose rules you learn if you leap into it and play it to the hilt. Otherwise, you are caught off balance, continually surprised by the shifting play. Non-players often whine and complain that luck always passes them by. They refuse to see that they can create some of their own luck.
Paradise on my right, Hell on my left and the Angel of Death behind.
When your opponent fears you, then's the moment when you give the fear its own rein, give it the time to work on him. Let it become terror. The terrified man fights himself. Eventually, he attacks in desperation. That is the most dangerous moment, but the terrified man can be trusted usually to make a fatal mistake.
No more terrible disaster could befall your people than for them to fall into the hands of a Hero.
The vision of time is broad, but when you pass through it, time becomes a narrow door.
If you rely only on your eyes, your other senses weaken.
War is the most readily available form of chaos.
One uses power by grasping it lightly. To grasp too strongly is to be taken over by power, and thus to become its victim.
Power tends to isolate those who hold too much of it. Eventually, they lose touch with reality... and fall.
The joy of living, its beauty, is all bound up in the fact that life can surprise you.
The only past which endures lies wordlessly within you.
Some say that people cling to Imperial leadership because space is infinite. They feel lonely without a unifying symbol. For a lonely people, the Emperor is a definite place. They can turn toward him and say: "See, there He is. He makes us one." Perhaps religion serves the same purpose.
There exists no separation between gods and men; one blends softly casual into the other.
Empires do not suffer emptiness of purpose at the time of their creation. It is when they have become established that aims are lost and replaced by vague ritual.
To come under siege... was the inevitable fate of power.
Reason is the first victim of strong emotion.
Command must always look confident. All that faith riding on your shoulders while you sit in the critical seat and never show it.
I must rule with eye and claw - as the hawk among lesser birds.
Some things beggar likeness.
From water does all life begin.
He shall know your ways as if born to them.
I never wanted to be a god. I wanted only to disappear like a jewel of trace dew caught by the morning. I wanted to escape the angels and the damned - alone... as though an oversight.
The eye that looks ahead to the safe course is closed forever.
Motivating people, forcing them to your will, gives you a cynical attitude towards humanity. It degrades everything it touches.
The thing the ecologically illiterate don't realise about an ecosystem is that it's a system. A system! A system maintains a certain fluid stability that can be destroyed by a misstep in just one niche. A system has order, flowing from point to point. If something dams that flow, order collapses. The untrained might miss that collapse until it was too late. That's why the highest function of ecology is the understanding of consequences.
For now is my grief heavier than the sands of the seas, she thought. This world has emptied me of all but the oldest purpose: tomorrow's life.
Mankind has only one science... its the science of discontent.
It's easier to be terrified by an enemy you admire.
Think on it, Chani: the princess will have the name, yet she'll live as less than a concubine - never to know a moment of tenderness from the man to whom she's bound. While we, Chani, we who carry the name of concubine - history will call us wives.
The test of a man isn't what you think he'll do. It's what he actually does.
I am like a person whose hands were kept numb, without sensation from the first moment of awareness - until one day the ability to feel is forced into them. And I say "Look! I have no hands!" But the people all around me say: "What are hands?
Humans are almost always lonely.
Law is the ultimate science.
A stone is heavy and the sand is weighty; but a fool's wrath is heavier than them both.
When you imagine mistakes, there can be no self-defense.
I see us giving love to each other in a time of quiet between storms. It's what we were meant to do.
A man's flesh is his own; the water belongs to the tribe.
The power to destroy a thing is the absolute control over it.
Humans live best when each has his place to stand, when each knows where he belongs in the scheme of things and what he may achieve. Destroy the place and you destroy the person.
A popular man arouses the jealousy of the powerful.
There is in each of us an ancient force that takes and an ancient force that gives. A man finds little difficulty facing that place within himself where the taking force dwells, but it's almost impossible for him to see into the giving force without changing into something other than man. For a woman, the situation is reversed... These things are so ancient within us... that they're ground into each separate cell of our bodies... It's as easy to be overwhelmed by giving as by taking.
Growth is limited by the necessity which is present in the least amount. And naturally, the least favorable condition controls the growth rate.
What is important for a leader is that which makes him a leader. It is the needs of his people.
Polish comes from the cities; wisdom from the desert.
My lungs taste the air of Time, blown past falling sands...
One makes a choice between dangers.
Is it defeatist or treacherous for a doctor to diagnose a disease correctly? My only intention is to cure the disease.
To suspect your own mortality is to know the beginning of terror; to learn irrefutably that you are mortal is to know the end of terror.
When God hath ordained a creature to die in a particular place, He causeth that creature's wants to direct him to that place.
When he wanted, he could radiate charm and sincerity, but I often wonder in these later days if anything about him was as it seemed. I think now he was a man fighting constantly to escape the bars of an invisible cage.
“There's a Bene Gesserit saying,” she said. “You have sayings for everything!” he protested. “You'll like this one,” she said. “It goes: Do not count a human dead until you've seen his body. And even then you can make a mistake.”
Leto turned a hard stare at Kynes. And Kynes, returning the stare, found himself troubled by a fact he had observed here: This Duke was concerned more over the men than he was over the spice. He risked his own life, and that of his son to save the men. He passed off the loss of a spice crawler with a gesture. The threat to men's lives had him in a rage. A leader such as that would command fanatic loyalty. He would be difficult to defeat. Against his own will and all previous judgements, Kynes admitted to himself: I like this Duke.
I should like friendship with you... and trust. I should like that respect for each other which grows in the breast without demand for the huddlings of sex.
It occurred to her that mercy was the ability to stop, if only for a moment. There was no mercy where there could be no stopping.
The Guild Navigators, gifted with limited prescience, had made the fatal decision: they'd chosen always the clear, safe course that leads ever downward to stagnation.
Muad'Dib could indeed, see the Future, but you must understand the limits of this power. Think of sight. You have eyes, yet cannot see without light. If you are on the floor of a valley, you cannot see beyond the valley. Just so, Muad'Dib could not always choose to look across the mysterious terrain. He tells us that a single obscure decision of prophecy, perhaps the choice of one word over another, could change the entire aspect of the future. He tells us “The vision of time is broad, but when you pass through it, time becomes a narrow door.” And always, he fought the temptation to choose a clear, safe course, warning “That path leads ever down into stagnation."
Science is made up of so many things that appear obvious after they are explained.
I should've suspected trouble when the coffee failed to arrive.
It occurred to Paul then that he had seen his own dead body along countless reaches of the time web, but never once had he seen his moment of death.
Prophets have a way of dying by violence.
Behold, as a wild ass in the desert, go I forth to my work.
Desperate people are the most dangerous.
His voice was low, charged with unspeakable adjectives.
Religion is but the most ancient and honorable way in which men have striven to make sense out of God's universe.
Never obliterate a man unthinkingly, the way an entire fief might do it through some due process of law. Always do it for an overriding purpose — and know your purpose!
Use the first moments in study. You may miss many an opportunity for quick victory this way, but the moments of study are insurance of success. Take your time and be sure.
A leader, you see, is one of the things that distinguishes a mob from a people. He maintains the level of individuals. Too few individuals, and a people reverts to a mob.
TO THE LADY JESSICA - May this place give you as much pleasure as it has given me. Please permit the room to convey a lesson we learned from the same teachers: the proximity of a desirable thing tempts one to overindulgence. On that path lies danger.
The meeting between ignorance and knowledge, between brutality and culture - it begins in the dignity with which we treat the dead.
We came from Caladan — a paradise world for our form of life. There existed no need on Caladan to build a physical paradise or a paradise of the mind — we could see the actuality all around us. And the price we paid was the price men have always paid for achieving a paradise in this life — we went soft, we lost our edge.
What is the son but an extension of the father?
One thought remained to him. Leto saw it in formless light on rays of black: The day the flesh shapes and the flesh the day shapes. The thought struck him with a sense of fullness he knew he could never explain.
Each man is a little war.
Cool your sorrow - we've the diversions for it; three things there are that ease the heart - water, green grass, and the beauty of woman.
One peels a problem like an onion.
What delicious abandon in the sleep of the child. When do we lose it?
One does not risk everything to settle a score prematurely.
Whether a thought is spoken or not it is a real thing and it has power.
One enemy at a time.
The real wealth of a planet is in its landscape, how we take part in the basic source of civilization - agriculture.
The young reed dies so easily. Beginnings are times of such peril.
Hard tasks need hard ways.
Beginnings are such delicate times.
To accept a little death is worse than death itself.
At the age of fifteen, he had already learned silence.
The absence of a thing, this can be as deadly as the presence. The absence of air, eh? The absence of water? The absence of anything else we're addicted to.
One must always keep the tools of statecraft sharp and ready. Power and fear - sharp and ready.
She looked at patches of blackness. Black is a blind remembering, she thought.
I should've suspected trouble when the coffee failed to arrive.
There's steel in this man that no one has taken the temper out of...
A beginning is the time for taking the most delicate care that the balances are correct. This every sister of the Bene Gesserit knows. To begin your study of the life of Muad'Dib, then, take care that you first place him in his time: born in the 57th year of the Padishah Emperor, Shaddam IV. And take the most special care that you locate Muad'Dib in his place: the planet Arrakis. Do not be deceived by the fact that he was born on Caladan and lived his first fifteen years there. Arrakis, the planet known as Dune, is forever his place.
The night is a tunnel, she thought, a hole into tomorrow...
The day hums sweetly when you have enough bees working for you.
Above all else, the mentat must be a generalist, not a specialist. It is wise to have decisions of great moment monitored by generalists. Experts and specialists lead you quickly into chaos. They are a source of useless nit-picking, the ferocious quibble over a comma.
O you who know what we suffer here, do not forget us in your prayers.
Scientists seek the lawfulness of events. It is the task of Religion to fit man into this lawfulness.
Be prepared to appreciate what you meet.
Respect for the truth comes close to being the basis for all morality. Something cannot emerge from nothing.
God created Arrakis to train the faithful.
Beware! The mind of the believer stagnates. It fails to grow outward into an unlimited, infinite universe.
The mind commands the body and it obeys. The mind orders itself and meets resistance.
When law and duty are one, united by religion, you never become fully conscious, fully aware of yourself. You are always a little less than an individual.
A ruler must learn to persuade and not to compel... he must lay the best coffee hearth to attract the finest men... a good ruler has to learn his world's language... it's different for every world... the language of the rocks and growing things... the language you don't hear just with your ears... The mystery of life isn't a problem to solve, but a reality to experience.... Understanding must move with the flow of the process.
The universe is full of doors.
She thought of the boy's features as an exquisite distillation out of random patterns - endless queues of happenstance meeting at this nexus.
I observed you in pain, lad. Pain's merely the axis of the test. Your mother's told you about our ways of observing. I see the signs of her teaching in you. Our test is crisis and observation.
“Are you already training my replacement? Piter demanded. "Replace you? Why, Piter, where could I find another Mentat with your cunning and venom?" "The same place you found me, Baron." "Perhaps I should at that," the Baron mused. "You do seem a bit unstable lately. And the spice you eat!" "Are my pleasures too expensive, Baron? Do you object to them?" "My dear Piter, your pleasures are what tie you to me. How could I object to that?”
When strangers meet, great allowances should be made for differences in custom and training.
The Reverend Mother must combine the seductive wiles of a courtesan with the untouchable majesty of a virgin goddess, holding these attributes in tension so long as the powers of her youth endure. For when youth and beauty have gone, she will find that the place-between, once occupied by tension, has become a wellspring of cunning and resourcefulness.
One should never presume one is the sole object of a hunt.
“You must teach me someday how you do that,” he said. “The way you thrust your worries aside and turn to practical matters. It must be a Bene Gesserit thing.” “It's a female thing,” she said.
The man without emotions is the one to fear.
Observe the plans within plans within plans.
He who controls the spice controls the universe.
The spice must flow.
Belief can be manipulated. Only knowledge is dangerous.
To know a thing well, know its limits. Only when pushed beyond its limits does a thing begin to reveal itself. Do not depend only on theory if your life is at stake.
The purpose of argument is to change the nature of truth.
The only defense against age is that age attacks all things equally.
The difference between a good administrator and a bad one is about five heartbeats. Good administrators make immediate choices.
Not addressing immediate needs is an offense to the young.
There is knowledge you can only gain by participating in it. There's no way to learn it by standing off and looking and talking.
The greatest victory is that which requires no battle.
Truth suffers from too much analysis.
The hearts of all men dwell in the same wilderness.
Love is a very ancient force, which served its purpose in its day but no longer is essential for the survival of the species.
To see eternity was to be exposed to eternity's whims, oppressed by endless dimensions.
Memory never recaptures reality. Memory reconstructs. All reconstructions change the original, becoming external frames of reference that inevitably fall short.
The potential richness of a man is to be measured in the space he occupies in the hearts of others.
Respect for bravery must stand higher than the avoidance of administrative shares.
To use knowledge as a weapon is to degrade it.
The proper training of a human can only begin after birth.
The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is an attribute of the strong.
It is the unknown we fear when we look upon death and darkness. Nothing more.
The essential inherent rights of the individual are only created by virtue of the social contract.
Civilization depends on guiding the power of each individual according to the will of the people.
Dependency on others for help weakens our resolve and stifles our potential.
The ultimate source of power can only be found within oneself.
Growth is not merely adding new things, but also the conscious rejection of the old.
Wisdom is the ability to judge and prepare for the unseen.
To know the self is to have power over the self.
All that you touch, you change. All that you change, changes you.
To reject all authority is to become one's own authority.
Patience is the foundation of all virtues.
True strength lies in knowing when to yield and when to resist.
The function of government is not to rule, but to ensure the freedom of its people.
The true measure of a civilization is in how it treats its lowest citizens.
The more power you have, the more power you want.
The future remains uncertain and so it should, for it is the canvas upon which we paint our desires. Thus always the human condition faces a beautifully empty canvas.
To stay on the path is a character test.
Machine makers always run the risk of becoming totally machine.
Membership in a conspiracy, as in an army, frees people from the sense of personal responsibility.
If you want immortality, then deny form. Whatever has form has mortality. Beyond form is the formless, the immortal.
The best prophets lead you up to the curtain and let you peer through for yourself.
We never get far from wealth and all of its masks when we deal with power.
The old feudal aristocracies relied on land, and they were tied to the land until it killed them... We've moved beyond that.
If you trap the universe in numbers, you must always look straight down the barrel of infinity.
When the lag behind, he is open to self-deceptions.
A powerful enemy is better to have than a tame friend.
When you think to take determination of your fate into your own hands, that is the moment you can be crushed. Be cautious. Allow for surprises. When we create, there are always other forces at work.
If enough of us believe, a new thing can be made to exist. Belief structure creates a filter through which chaos is sifted into order.
You cannot go on forever stealing what you need without regard to those who come after.
In a world so filled with wonders, they have managed to create boredom.
A plan depends as much upon execution as it does upon concept.
Treachery within treachery within treachery.
To save one from a mistake is a gift of paradise.
Given the right lever, you can move a planet.
The vision made him want to freeze into immobility, but this, too, was action with its consequences.
The spice extends life. The spice expands consciousness. The spice is vital to space travel.
Just as individuals are born, mature, breed, and die, so do societies and civilizations and governments.
You've heard of animals chewing off a leg to escape a trap? There's an animal kind of trick. A human would remain in the trap, endure the pain, feigning death that he might kill the trapper and remove the threat to his kind.
Use the first moments in study. You may miss many an opportunity for quick victory this way, but the moments of study are insurance of success. Take your time and be sure.
The gift of words is the gift of deception and illusion.
That is the beginning of knowledge - the discovery of something we do not understand.
Some problems are best solved with an optimistic approach. Optimism shines a light on alternatives that are otherwise not visible.
Bless the Maker and His water. Bless the coming and going of Him. May His passage cleanse the world. May He keep the world for His people.
Such a rich store of myths enfolds Paul Muad'Dib, the Mentat Emperor, and his sister, Alia, it is difficult to see the real persons behind these veils. But there were, after all, a man born Paul Atreides and a woman born Alia. Their flesh was subject to space and time. And even though their oracular powers placed them beyond the usual limits of time and space, they came from human stock. They experienced real events which left real traces upon a real universe. To understand them, it must be seen that their catastrophe was the catastophe of all mankind. This work is dedicated, then, not to Muad'Dib or his sister, but to their heirs—to all of us.
Every civilization must contend with an unconscious force which can block, betray or countermand almost any conscious intention of the collectivity.
Once more the drama begins.
No matter how exotic human civilization becomes, no matter the developments of life and society nor the complexity of the machine/human interface, there always come interludes of lonely power when the course of humankind, the very future of humankind, depends on the relatively simple actions of single individuals.
You do not beg the sun for mercy.
There's but a thin line between many an enemy and many a friend. Where that line stops, there's no beginning and no end.
The convoluted wording of legalisms grew up around the necessity to hide from ourselves the violence we intend toward each other. Between depriving a man of one hour from his life and depriving him of his life there exists only a difference of degree. You have done violence to him, consumed his energy. Elaborate euphemisms may conceal your intent to kill, but behind any use of power over another the ultimate assumption remains: "I feed on your energy."
Since every individual is accountable ultimately to the self, the formation of that self demands our utmost care and attention.
How seductive it is to live in peace.
Good government never depends upon laws, but upon the personal qualities of those who govern. The machinery of government is always subordinate to the will of those who administer that machinery. The most important element of government, therefore, is the method of choosing leaders.
This is the fallacy of power: ultimately it is effective only in an absolute, limited universe. But the basic lesson of our relativistic universe is that things change. Any power must always meet a greater power. Muad'Dib taught this lesson to the Sardaukar on the Plains of Arrakeen. His descendants have yet to learn the lesson for themselves.
One cannot have a single thing without its opposite.
If you put away those who report accurately, you'll keep only those who know what you want to hear. I can think of nothing more poisonous than to rot in the stink of your own reflections.
If you focus your awareness only upon your own rightness, then you invite the forces of opposition to overwhelm you. This is a common error. Even I, your teacher, have made it.
Peace encourages aggression, thus igniting war.
One learns from books and reels only that certain things can be done. Actual learning requires that you do those things.
Run faster. History is a constant race between invention and catastrophe. Education helps but it's never enough. You must also run.
The wise animal blends into its surroundings.
My mind controls my reality.
The one-eyed view of our universe says you must not look far afield for problems. Such a problem may never arrive. Instead, tend to the wolf within your fences. The packs ranging outside may not even exist.
Any path which narrows future possibilities may become a lethal trap. Humans are not threading their way through a maze; they scan a vast horizon filled with unique opportunities. The narrowing viewpoint of the maze should appeal only to creatures with their noses buried in sand.
Radicals are only to be feared when you try to suppress them. You must demonstrate that you will use the best of what they offer.
"Make no heroes," my father said.
All machines fail or are superseded. Still, the Army worships at the shrine of such things - both fascinated and fearful... In its guts, the Army knows it is the Sorcerer's Apprentice. It unleashes technology and never again can the magic be stuffed back into the bottle.
Technology breeds anarchy. It distributes these tools at random. And with them goes the provocation for violence. The ability to make and use savage destroyers falls inevitably into the hands of smaller and smaller groups until at last the group is a single individual.
The ability to view our futures can become a bore... It has occurred to me more than once that holy boredom is good and sufficient reason for the invention of free will.
Sheathe the blade. Never remove it without drawing blood.
Even ordinary tyrants have motives and feelings beyond those usually assigned them by facile historians... History has a way of magnifying some characteristics while it discards others.
Government is a shared myth. When the myth dies, the government dies.
The expectations which history creates for one generation are often shattered in the next generation.
Some things do not change very much. They are merely taken from one place and reformed in another place.
The mind imposes this framework which it calls "reality." That arbitrary framework has a tendency to be quite independent of what your senses report.
Most people are not creatures of reason.
Any religion circles like a planet around a sun which it must use for its energy, upon which it depends for its very existence.
The universe is timeless at its roots and contains therefore all times and all futures.
The fire never completely goes out.
Police always observe that criminals prosper. It takes a pretty dull policeman to miss the fact that the position of authority is the most prosperous criminal position available.
I will die four deaths - the death of the flesh, the death of the soul, the death of the myth and the death of reason. And all of these deaths contain the seed of resurrection.
Reputation can be a beautiful weapon. It often spills less blood.
Sometimes, Time rushes by me; sometimes, it creeps.
The surest sign that an aristocracy exists is the discovery of barriers against change, curtains of iron or stone or of any substance which excludes the new, the different.
All of us try to evolve, but if something blocks us, we can transfer our potential into pain - seeking it or giving it. Adolescents are particularly vulnerable.
It was the Fremen custom to treat distant people as hostile until they threw sand into the air. Thrown sand is a profound gesture. It says: "We share the same burden. Sand is our only enemy. This is what we drink. The hand that holds sand holds no weapon."
All people have intentions.
The three legs of the agreement-tripod are desire, data and doubt. Accuracy and honesty have little to do with it... Desire brings the participants together. Data sets the limits of their dialogue. Doubt frames the questions.
Argument closes off the doors of the senses... It always masks violence. Continued too long, argument always leads to violence.
How tempting it is to raise high walls and keep out change. Rot here in our own self-satisfied comfort. Enclosures of any kind are a fertile breeding ground for hatred of outsiders. That produces a bitter harvest.
If I choose the good, does that make me good?
When a thing vanishes, that is as much of a message as when a thing suddenly appears. The empty spaces are always worthy of our study.
You don't know what it is to love. What have you ever given?
It's not knowing that conjures up the greatest terrors.
Mobility is the key to military success. If you're tied down in forts, even whole-planet forts, you are ultimately vulnerable.
When logic fails, another tool must be used.
Rot at the core spreads outward.
I warn you that ignorance thrives on hysteria... The undeserving maintain power by promoting hysteria. The Atreides art is the art of ruling without hysteria, the art of being responsible for the uses of power.
If we cannot adjust our differences peacefully we are less than human.
In my estimation, more misery has been created by reformers than by any other force in human history. Show me someone who says, "Something must be done!" and I will show you a head full of vicious intentions that have no other outlet. What we must strive for always is to find the natural flow and go with it.
Nothing surpasses the complexity of the human mind.
Tone of voice and attitude alone can subjugate another's will.
One of the most dangerous things in the universe is an ignorant people with real grievances. That is nowhere near as dangerous, however, as an informed and intelligent society with grievances. The damage that vengeful intelligence can wreak, you cannot even imagine.
I always prepare secondary ways of dealing with problems.
Survival! That's all the noble purpose we need. Survival!
Man is but a pebble dropped in a pool. And if man is but a pebble, then all his works can be no more.
It is your fate, forgetfulness. All of the old lessons of life, you lose and gain and lose and gain again.
No planet, no land or sea, no part of any land or sea is here forever. Wherever we stand, we are only stewards.
Never believe that you have plumbed the depths of any place... or of any human.
Complexity hides within complexity. Great deeds and foul ones have been done at the goading of sexual forces.
You may think of this only as sexuality but we prefer the more basic term: procreation. It has many facets and offshoots and it has apparently unlimited energy. The emotion called "love" is only one small aspect... This energy must have an outlet. Bottle it up and it becomes monstrously dangerous. Redirect it and it will sweep over anything in its path. This is an ultimate secret of all religions.
Laws to suppress tend to strengthen what they would prohibit. This is the fine point on which all the legal professions of history have based their job security.
I know a profound pattern humans deny with words even while their actions affirm it. They say they seek security and quiet, conditions they call peace. Even as they spread, they create seeds of turmoil and violence.
Humans have this deep desire to classify, to apply labels to everything... We lay claim to what we name. We assume an ownership that can be misleading and dangerous.
You cannot know history unless you know how leaders move with its currents. Every leader requires outsiders to perpetuate his leadership.
You cannot manipulate a marionette with only one string.
You cannot know history unless you know how leaders move with its currents. Every leader requires outsiders to perpetuate his leadership.
If I am to die, I must pass along a transcendental lesson. I must leave with serenity.
Always beware of those who fawn upon us, nuzzling up to all of that power we're supposed to have. How flattering to find great mobs of servants waiting and anxious to do our bidding! How utterly debilitating.
We trundle along on borrowed days.
There is nothing humans hate more than the unpredictable.
Whose truth? Modified in what way? In what context?
Names carry magic.
What glue had actually held the Old Empire together? Many things, some small and some large, but mostly economic. Lines of connection thought of often as conveniences. And what kept them from blasting one another out of existence? The Great Convention. "You blast anyone and we blast you."
Trust no government!
Never damage your own nest.
All states are abstractions.
Oh, the perils of leadership in a species so anxious to be told what to do. How little they knew of what they created by their demands. Leaders made mistakes. And those mistakes, amplified by the numbers who followed without questioning, moved inevitably toward great disasters.
The greatest relevancy can become irrelevant in the space of a heartbeat. Mentats should look upon such moments with joy.
Some precious stones can be identified by their impurities. Experts map impurities within the stones. A secret fingerprint. People are like that. You often know them by their defects. The glittering surface tells you too little. Good identification requires you to look deep inside and see the impurities. There is the gem quality of a total being. What would Van Gogh have been without impurities?
Moral decisions are always easy to recognize. They are where you abandon self-interest.
Do not depend only on theory if your life is at stake.
The difference between sentiment and sentimentality is easy to see. When you avoid killing somebody's pet on the glazeway, that's sentiment. If you swerve to avoid the pet and that causes you to kill pedestrians, that is sentimentality.
The true warrior often understands his enemy better than he understands his friends. A dangerous pitfall if you let understanding lead to sympathy as it will naturally when left unguided.
Never follow a leader without asking your own questions.
Humans can balance on strange surfaces. Even on unpredictable ones. It's called "getting in tune." Great musicians know it. Surfers I watched when I was a child on Gammu, they knew it. Some waves throw you but you're prepared for that. You climb back up and go at it once more.
Uproot your questions from their ground the dangling roots will be seen. More questions!
Power attracts the psychotics. Always. That's what we have to avoid within ourselves.
Beware jargon. It usually hides ignorance and carries little knowledge.
We live in our little congeries like anyone else. Rooms of the mind, rooms of the body.
Creative anarchy is the path to survival in this universe.
Look for the ones who can say "Yes." Never bother with underlings who can only say "No."
Chaos exists as raw material from which to create order.
Paired opposites define your longings and those longings imprison you.
Today is sufficient unto today.
Technology tends toward avoidance of risks by investors. Uncertainty is ruled out if possible. People generally prefer the predictable. Few recognize how destructive this can be, how it imposes severe limits on variability and thus makes whole populations fatally vulnerable to the shocking ways our universe can throw the dice.
Duncan spoke quietly: "Lucilla, if you touch me again without my permission, I will try to kill you. I will try so hard that you very likely will have to kill me."
You seldom learn the names of the truly wealthy and powerful. You see only their spokesmen. The political arena makes a few exceptions to this but does not reveal the full power structure.
Concealed behind strong barriers the heart becomes ice.
The people who demand that the oracle predict for them really want to know next year's price on whalefur or something equally mundane. None of them wants an instant-by-instant prediction of his personal life.
They learned early that sharing secret or private names was an ancient device for ensnaring a person in affections.
The writing of history is largely a process of diversion. Most historical accounts divert attention from the secret influences around the recorded events.
The great mass of humankind possesses an unmistakable unit-identity. It can be one thing. It can act as a single organism.
Teg boiled it down to an essence: If only one person followed such guiding principles, this was a better universe.
You took the universe as you found it and applied your principles where you could.
Indeed? Pardon me for not listening further but I am really on an urgent errand.
He shook his head, thinking of the Bene Gesserit designs behind those genetic markers in Teg's face — that hawk look, the crease lines and that inner thing, that certainty of moral superiority. How moral and how superior?
“Only liberals really think. Only liberals are intellectual. Only liberals understand the needs of their fellows.” How much viciousness lay concealed in that word! Odrade thought. How much secret ego demanding to feel superior.
Hatred was as dangerous an emotion as love. The capacity for hatred was the capacity for its opposite.
Forces that we cannot understand permeate our universe. We see the shadows of those forces when they are projected upon a screen available to our senses, but understand them we do not.
Big breasts in a woman and hard loins in a man (that tightly muscular look to the buttocks) — these were naturally important in sexual matchings. But without the eyes, the rest of it could go for nothing. Eyes were essential. You could drown in the right kind of eyes, he had learned, sink right into them and be unaware of what was being done to you until penis was firmly clasped in vagina.
It began with recognition that humans were not created equal, that they possessed different inherited abilities and experienced different events in their lives. This produced people of different accomplishments and different worth.
Sheeana would learn in time that any person who lived through the decision to die evolved a new emotional balance. Fears were transitory.
Curiosity unsatisfied tended to create its own answers. Guesses were often more dangerous than facts.
I can say God, but that is not my God. That is only a noise and no more potent than any other noise.
“It was mostly sweet," he whispered, "and you were the sweetest of all.”
Some lies are easier to believe than the truth.
The wise man molds himself — the fool lives only to die.
I didn't want to be different. I wanted to be able to laugh. But I'm sister to an Emperor who's worshiped as a god. People fear me. I never wanted to be feared. I don't want to be part of history, I just want to be loved... and to love.
What the eyes had seen could not be erased.
The past is no farther away than your pillow.
To use raw power is to make yourself infinitely vulnerable to greater powers.
Growing older is to grow more wicked.
Do not be trapped by the need to achieve anything. This way, you achieve everything.
One moment of incompetence can be fatal.
As with all priests, you learned early to call the truth heresy.
There are some things no one can bear. I meddled in all the possible futures I could create until, finally, they created me.
But, putting on a stillsuit, he put on the desert.
The pitfall of Bene Gesserit training, she reminded herself, lay in the powers granted: such powers predisposed one to vanity and pride. But power deluded those who used it. One tended to believe power could overcome any barrier... including one's own ignorance.
People aren't concerned with love; it's too disordered. They prefer despotism. Too much freedom breeds chaos. We can't have that, can we? And how do you make despotism lovable?
We are so money-rich and so life-poor.
Often, I must speak otherwise than I think. This is called diplomacy.
Could it be, he wondered, that the oracle didn't tell the future? Could it be that the oracle made the future?
Every man carries his own past with him.
Let us not bandy philosophical nonsense. Every question can be boiled down to the one: Why is there anything?
Listening carefully to the teacher, one acquires an education.
Arrakis is the destination of everyone.
Everywhere there is peace, Paul thought. Everywhere... except in the heart of Muad'Dib.
There are many degrees of sight and many degrees of blindness, Paul thought.
He had taken his place in a universe he did not want, wearing flesh that did not fit.
When is a gift not a gift?
Heroic leaders often made mistakes... mistakes that were amplified by the number of followers who were held in thrall by charisma
What mattered a single moon in such a universe?
“Data,” Paul said. “I need more data.”
You can't stop a mental epidemic.
Have you noticed, Stil, how beautiful the young women are this year?
She felt that her body had walked into this place with her soul creeping behind.
“Irreverence is a most necessary ingredient of religion,” Leto said. “Not to speak of its importance in philosophy. Irreverence is the only way left to us for testing our universe.”
Never to forgive — never to forget.
When your actions describe a system of evil consequences, you should be judged by those consequences and not by your explanations. It is thus we should judge Muad'Dib.
Forget mystery and accept love. There's no mystery about love. It comes from life.
“We have eternity, beloved." "You may have eternity. I have only now." "But this is eternity." He stroked her forehead.”
There are problems in this universe for which there are no answers.
Whatever comes from behind the mountains must cross the dunes.
Education is no substitute for intelligence. That elusive quality is defined only in part by puzzle-solving ability. It is in the creation of new puzzles reflecting what your senses report that you round out the definitions.
Do actions agree with words? There's your measure of reliability. Never confine yourself to the words.
Nature does not make mistakes. Right and wrong are human categories.
If you need something to worship, then worship life - all life, every last crawling bit of it! We're all in this beauty together!
The people I distrust most are those who want to improve our lives but have only one course of action.
The truth always carries the ambiguity of the words used to express it.
What does a mirror look at?
When I need to identify rebels, I look for men with principles.
Never attempt to reason with people who know they are right.
When a wise man does not understand, he says: "I do not understand." The fool and the uncultured are ashamed of their ignorance. They remain silent when a question could bring them wisdom.
Parting with friends is a sadness. A place is only a place.
Yes, the one who can be many places at once: the Kwisatz Haderach. Many men have tried the drug... so many, but none has succeeded.
“Principles,” he said, “are what you fight for. Most men go through a lifetime unchallenged, except at the final moment. They have so few unfriendly arenas in which to test themselves.”
Most deadly errors arise from obsolete assumptions.
To attempt an understanding of Muad'Dib without understanding his mortal enemies, the Harkonnens, is to attempt seeing Truth without knowing Falsehood. It is the attempt to see the Light without knowing Darkness. It cannot be.
Guilt starts as a feeling of failure.
People don't vote. Instinct tells them it's useless.
Ready comprehension is often a knee-jerk response and the most dangerous form of understanding. It blinks an opaque screen over your ability to learn. Be warned. Understand nothing. All comprehension is temporary.
I am not the river I am the net.
All governments needed to remain under suspicion during their time of power including that of the Sisterhood itself. Trust no government! Not even mine.
Educational bureaucracies dull a child's questing sensitivity.
Ultimately, all things are known because you want to believe you know.
Surely you know bureaucracies always become voracious aristocracies after they attain commanding power.
Major flaws in government arise from a fear of making radical internal changes even though a need is clearly seen.
There's no secret to balance. You just have to feel the waves.
Our gods should mature as we mature.
If I can't laugh at myself I'm really lost.
Intelligence takes chances with limited data in an arena where mistakes are not only possible but also necessary.
Storms beget storms. Rage begets rage. Revenge begets revenge. Wars beget wars.
Everything about you is a cesspool. You have no style.
Spend energies on those who make you strong. Energy spent on weaklings drags you to doom.
Rules are often an excuse to ignore compassion.
The conventional teacher feels threatened by emerging talents and squelches them because of a deep-seated desire to feel superior and safe in a safe environment.
Violence builds more violence and the pendulum swings until the violent ones are shattered.
That was the Bene Gesserit view of history, ancient Santayana's words resonating in their lives: “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.”
They were permitted their illusions. What a comfort. You could pretend your life was forever, that tomorrow would be better, that the gods in their heavens watched you with care.
We're like a damned old married couple. Funny stories in the middle of the night.
This moment is part of forever.
“For what do you hunger, Lord?” Moneo ventured. “For a humankind which can make truly long-term decisions. Do you know the key to that ability, Moneo?” “You have said it many times, Lord. It is the ability to change your mind.”
The problem of leadership is inevitably: Who will play God?
Most believe that a satisfactory future requires a return to an idealized past, a past which never in fact existed.
Prisons are needed only to provide the illusion that courts and police are effective. They're a kind of job insurance.
You should never be in the company of anyone with whom you would not want to die.
Only fools prefer the past!
There has never been a truly selfless rebel, just hypocrites — conscious hypocrites or unconscious hypocrites, it's all the same.
Privilege becomes arrogance. Arrogance promotes injustice. The seeds of ruin blossom.
Small souls who seek power over others first destroy the faith those others might have in themselves.
It's very difficult convincing the young of anything. They're born knowing so much.
Why is it that foolishness repeats itself with such monotonous precision?
“I never thought it would be easy to serve God," she said. "I just didn't think it would be this hard.”
Military foolishness is ultimately suicidal. They believe that by risking death they pay the price of any violent behavior against enemies of their own choosing. They have the invader mentality, that false sense of freedom from responsibility for your own actions.
“The more I find out, the more I realize that I don't know what's going on." "How fortunate that you have discovered the way of wisdom," Leto said.”
“Is God troubled?” And her companion replied: “The sins of this universe would trouble anyone.”
In the view of infinity, any defined long-term is short-term.
We had something few experience. We were joined in our strengths rather than in our weaknesses.
A leader tries to perpetuate the conditions which demand his leadership. Thus, the leader requires the outsider.
“You have to appreciate life before you want to preserve it," she said. "And it's the survivors who maintain the most light and poignant hold upon the beauties of living. Women know this more often than men because birth is the reflection of death.”
I am a collection of the obsolete, a relic of the damned, of the lost and strayed. I am the waylaid pieces of history which sank out of sight in all of our pasts. Such an accumulation of riffraff has never before been imagined.
There's no reassuring ceiling over you, Moneo. Only an open sky full of changes. Welcome it. Every sense you possess is an instrument for reacting to change. Does that tell you nothing?
Paradox is a pointer telling you to look beyond it. If paradoxes bother you, that betrays your deep desire for absolutes. The relativist treats a paradox merely as interesting, perhaps amusing or even, dreadful thought, educational.
“Religious institutions perpetuate a mortal master-servant relationship,” Leto said. “They create an arena which attracts prideful human power-seekers with all of their nearsighted prejudices!”
Right from the first, the little people who formed the governments which promised to equalize the social burdens found themselves suddenly in the hands of bureaucratic aristocracies. Of course, all bureaucracies follow this pattern, but what a hypocrisy to find this even under a communized banner. Ahhh, well, if patterns teach me anything it's that patterns are repeated.
All of history is a malleable instrument in my hands. Ohhh, I have accumulated all of these pasts and I possess every fact—yet the facts are mine to use as I will and, even using them truthfully, I change them.
All rebellions are ordinary and an ultimate bore. They are copied out of the same pattern, one much like another. The driving force is adrenalin addiction and the desire to gain personal power. All rebels are closet aristocrats. That's why I can convert them so easily.
“In the wrong hands,” Leto said, “monolithic centralized power is a dangerous and volatile instrument.” “And your hands are the right ones?”
Chaos is no surprise. It has predictable characteristics. For one thing, it carries away order and strengthens the forces at the extremes.
Remember that there exists a certain malevolence about the formation of any social order. It is the struggle for existence by an artificial entity. Despotism and slavery hover at the edges. Many injuries occur and, thus, the need for laws. The law develops its own power structure, creating more wounds and new injustices. Such trauma can be healed by cooperation, not by confrontation. The summons to cooperate identifies the healer.
Power bases are very dangerous because they attract people who are truly insane, people who seek power only for the sake of power.
You don't see much of any path unless you are Janus, looking simultaneously backward and forward.
Radicals always see matters in terms which are too simple—black and white, good and evil, them and us. By addressing complex matters in that way, they rip open a passage for chaos. The art of government as you call it, is the mastery of chaos.
Religion suppresses curiosity.
In the week before their departure to Arrakis, when all the final scurrying about had reached a nearly unbearable frenzy, an old crone came to visit the mother of the boy, Paul. It was a warm night at Castle Caladan, and the ancient pile of stone that had served the Atreides family as home for twenty-six generations bore that cooled-sweat feeling it acquired before a change in the weather.
Duncan, have I not told you that when you think you know something, that is a most perfect barrier against learning?
Most humans are not strong enough to find freedom within.
“There is the difference between us,” he said. “You are God embodied. You walk around within the greatest miracle of this universe, yet you refuse to touch or see or feel or believe in it.”
How sure it is, Leto thought, that a weapon can lock a person into a predictable pattern of behavior.
Scratch a conservative and you find someone who prefers the past over any future. Scratch a liberal and find a closet aristocrat.
Gods need take no responsibility for anything except genesis. Gods accept everything and thus accept nothing. Gods must be identifiable yet remain anonymous. Gods do not need a spirit world.
Words can carry any burden we wish. All that's required is agreement and a tradition upon which to build.
“Anything and anyone can fail," he said, "but brave good friends help.”
It is another kind of marriage — the marriage of privilege and duty. It is the aristocrat's explanation and his excuse.
Religion began as a female monopoly, wrested from them only after its social power became too dominant. Women were the first medical researchers and practitioners. There has never been any clear balance between the sexes because power goes with certain roles as it certainly goes with knowledge.
You always know the creative because it is revealed openly. Concealment betrays the existence of another force entirely.
But the tripod upon which Eternity swings is composed of flesh and thought and emotion.
In politics, the tripod is the most unstable of all structures.
You well know the weakness there! Shield your son too much, Jessica, and he'll not grow strong enough to fulfill any destiny.
Laws tend to be temporary over the long haul, Moneo. There is no such thing as rule-governed creativity.
“I began with love and prayer,” Moneo said. “I changed to anger and rebellion. I was transformed into what you see before you. I recognize my duty and I do it.”
“A bad administrator is more concerned with reports than with decisions. He wants the hard record which he can display as an excuse for his errors.” “And good administrators?” “Oh, they depend on verbal orders. They never lie about what they've done if their verbal orders cause problems, and they surround themselves with people able to act wisely on the basis of verbal orders. Often, the most important piece of information is that something has gone wrong. Bad administrators hide their mistakes until it's too late to make corrections.” Leto watched her as she thought about the people who served him — especially about Moneo. “Men of decision,” she said.”
The Golden Path demands it. And what is the Golden Path? you ask. It is the survival of humankind, nothing more nor less.
“What happens when you think like a Fremen? "You remember that you should never be in company that you wouldn't want to die with.”
He thinks that by repeating he creates some kind of truth.
“Forgive you?” Leto's voice was full of sweet reason. “Of course I forgive you. That is your God's function. Your crime is forgiven. However, your stupidity requires a response.”
I poke nothing at you except words. I do it without fear of offending because I have learned that you have no ears.
If we cannot adjust our differences peaceably, then we are less than human.
If there is no enemy, one must be invented.
How persistent it is, this demand that our gods be perfect. The Greeks were much more reasonable about such things.
Governments can be useful to the governed only so long as inherent tendencies toward tyranny are restrained.
Who owns this river passage? This verdant valley? This peninsula? This planet? None of us.
You have square thoughts which resist circles.
As you well know, the secret of community lies in suppression of the incompatible.
“Beware of the truth, gentle Sister. Although much sought after, truth can be dangerous to the seeker. Myths and reassuring lies are much easier to find and believe. If you find a truth, even a temporary one, it can demand that you make painful changes.”
Single purpose is the mark of the fanatic and I am not a fanatic!
All contemporaries do not inhabit the same time.
Did you build high walls around you only to sit within them and indulge in self-pity?
When you rule, you gain knowledge of power. This can lead into impetuous irresponsibility, into painful excesses and that can lead to the terrible destroyer-wild hedonism.
When alarmed, you cling to your native language because all the other patterned sounds are strange. You demand acceptable dress because a strange costume is threatening. This is system-feedback at its most primitive level. Your cells remember.
Women learned it at the hands of men; now men learn it at the hands of women.
The present is distraction; the future a dream; only memory can unlock the meaning of life.
Eve was not the first to pluck and sample the apple. Adam was first and he learned by this to put the blame on Eve.
She said: “My Uncle Malky used to say that love was a bad bargain because you get no guarantees.” "Your uncle Malky was a wise man." "He was stupid! Love needs no guarantees."
If you must label the absolute, use its proper name: Temporary.
I will tell you this only once. Homosexuals have been among the best warriors in our history, the berserkers of last resort. They were among our best priests and priestesses. Celibacy was no accident in religions. It is also no accident that adolescents make the best soldiers.
I assure you from a God's Olympian perch that government is a shared myth. When the myth dies, the government dies.
Death is a very personal thing. I will seldom interfere with it.
You think that in a world without birds, men would not invent aircraft! What a fool you are! Men can invent anything!
A seed blown on the wind could be tomorrow's willow tree.
It is human to have your soul brought to a crisis you did not anticipate.
“Lord, are you telling me that you are not really a god?" "I am telling you that I do not play hide-and-seek with death.”
He hates his God Emperor! No... he fears him. But don't we always hate what we fear?
“Specialists are not to be trusted,” Leto said. “Specialists are masters of exclusion, experts in the narrow.”
“Is Moneo your friend, too?” “We are friends of the stomach. We both like yogurt.”
“Perverts don't perpetuate!”
The young generally are incapable of making hard decisions unless those decisions are associated with immediate violence and the consequent sharp flow of adrenalin.
The cradle of genesis ultimately predisposes them to behavior more protective of life.
You aren't thinking or really existing unless you're willing to risk even your own sanity in the judgement of your existence.
If all those around you believe some particular thing, you will soon be tempted to share in that belief.
I'm going to rub your faces in things you try to avoid. I don't find it strange that all you want to believe is only that which comforts you. How else do humans invent the traps which betray us into mediocrity? How else do we define cowardice?
If I always behave with propriety, no matter what it costs me to suppress my own desires, then that is the measure of me. Such is the essence of self-control.
The joy of living, its beauty is all bound up in the fact that life can surprise you.
They were such seriously futile people that she found herself wanting to cry out against their ready-made justifications for pointless lives.
Peace demands solutions, but we never reach living solutions; we only work toward them. A fixed solution is, by definition, a dead solution. The trouble with peace is that it tends to punish mistakes instead of rewarding brilliance.
Things could not be forever ordered and formulated. He had to find the rhythm of change and see between the changes to the changing itself.
The past may show the right way to behave if you live in the past, Stil, but circumstances change.
I realize that humans cannot bear very much reality. Most lives are a flight from selfhood. Most prefer the truths of the stable. You stick your heads into the stanchions and munch contentedly until you die. Others use you for their purposes. Not once do you live outside the stable to lift your head and be your own creature. Muad'Dib came to tell you about that. Without understanding his message, you cannot revere him!
The assumption that humans exist within an essentially impermanent universe, taken as an operational precept, demands that the intellect become a totally aware balancing instrument.
They who learn the lesson of self-deception too well shall perish by that deception.
This moment here is the only observable time and place for us in our universe. I tell you to savor this moment and understand what it teaches.
To stay awake all night adds a day to your life.
Government and religion united, and breaking a law became sin. A smell of blasphemy arose like smoke around any questioning of governmental edicts.
Every question, every problem doesn't have a single correct answer. One must permit diversity. A monolith is unstable.
To be sighted in the land of the blind carries its own perils.
Ignorance has its advantages. A universe of surprises is what I pray for!
In shield fighting, one moves fast on defense, slow on attack. Attack has the sole purpose of tricking the opponent into a misstep, setting him up for the attack sinister. The shield turns the fast blow, admits the slow kindjal!
All the special training from Hawat and his mother — the mnemonics, the focusing of awareness, the muscle control and sharpening of sensitivities, the study of languages and nuances of voices — all of it clicked into a new kind of understanding in his mind.
May thy knife chip and shatter.
Anger is one thing, violence another.
She focused on the psychokinesthetic extension of herself, looking within, and was confronted immediately with a cellular core, a pit of blackness from which she recoiled. That is the place where we cannot look, she thought. There is the place the Reverend Mothers are so reluctant to mention — the place where only a Kwisatz Haderach may look.
Things persisted in not being what they seemed.
You cannot back into the future.
Stilgar squared his shoulders, stepped closer to Paul and lowered his voice. "Now, remember what I told you. Do it simply and directly — nothing fancy... You don't have to impress anyone with your courage. We know you are brave. All you must do is call the maker and ride him."
"Control the coinage and the courts — let the rabble have the rest." Thus the Padishah Emperor advises you. And he tells you; "If you want profits, you must rule." There is truth in these words, but I ask myself: "Who are the rabble and who are the ruled?"
You cannot avoid the interplay of politics within an orthodox religion. This power struggle permeates the training, educating and disciplining of the orthodox community. Because of this pressure, the leaders of such a community inevitably must face that ultimate internal question: to succumb to complete opportunism as the price of maintaining their rule, or risk sacrificing themselves for the sake of the orthodox ethic.
One of the most terrible moments in a boy's life... is when he discovers his father and mother are human beings who share a love that he can never quite taste. It's a loss, an awakening to the fact that the world is there and here and we are in it alone. The moment carries its own truth; you can't evade it.
He was warrior and mystic, ogre and saint, the fox and the innocent, chivalrous, ruthless, less than a god, more than a man. There is no measuring Muad'Dib's motives by ordinary standards. In the moment of his triumph, he saw the death prepared for him, yet he accepted the treachery. Can you say he did this out of a sense of justice? Whose justice, then? Remember, we speak now of the Muad'Dib who ordered battle drums made from his enemies' skins, the Muad'Dib who denied the conventions of his ducal past with a wave of the hand, saying merely: "I am the Kwisatz Haderach. That is reason enough."
Failure to make a decision was in itself a decision.
It is said of Muad'Dib that once when he saw a weed trying to grow between two rocks, he moved one of the rocks. Later, when the weed was seen to be flourishing, he covered it with the remaining rock. “That was its fate,” he explained.
Governments may rise and fall for reasons which appear insignificant, Prince. What small events! An argument between two women... which way the wind blows on a certain day... a sneeze, a cough, the length of a garment or the chance collision of a fleck of sand and a courtier's eye. It is not always the majestic concerns of Imperial ministers which dictate the course of history, nor is it necessarily the pontifications of priests which move the hands of God.
He mastered the inner world while holding the outer in contempt, and this led to catastrophe.
Better the complexities one thought he knew than the complexities which defied understanding.
This is the perspective which you create with your own belief, and beliefs can be manipulated by imagination. You've learned only a limited way of looking at the universe. Now you must make the universe your own creation.
There's no such thing as equal justice anywhere. It's unsettling to a society when you try to achieve such a false balance.
Natural selection has been described as an environment selectively screening for those who will have progeny. Where humans are concerned, though, this is an extremely limiting viewpoint. Reproduction by sex tends toward experiment and innovation. It raises many questions, including the ancient one about whether environment is a selective agent after the variation occurs, or whether environment plays a pre-selective role in determining the variations which it screens. Dune did not really answer those questions: it merely raised new questions which Leto and the Sisterhood may attempt to answer over the next five hundred generations.
Muad'Dib must always be that inner outrage against the complacently powerful, against the charlatans and the dogmatic fanatics. It is that inner outrage which must have its say because Muad'Dib taught us one thing above all others: that humans can endure only in a fraternity of social justice.
And his father was right: trying for some ultimate control of the universe, you only built weapons with which the universe eventually defeated you.
First, as to Time: there is no difference between ten thousand years and one year; no difference between one hundred thousand years and a heartbeat. No difference. That is the first fact about Time. And the second fact: the entire universe with all of its Time is within me.
The only permanence was fluid. Change was all that mattered.
Is your religion real when it costs you nothing and carries no risk? Is your religion real when you fatten upon it? Is your religion real when you commit atrocities in its name?
But the universe would not turn backward. It was a great engine projected upon the grey void of nonexistence.
We possess only this moment in which to dedicate ourselves continuously to the sacred presence which we share and create.
Holiness has replaced love in your religion!
Stuff that into your womb and give birth to it elsewhere!
The universe can be understood only by the wind.
He was aware now of many things — of statecraft and profound consequences in the smallest decisions. Yet he felt this knowledge and subtlety as a thin veneer covering an iron core of simpler, more deterministic awareness. And that older core called out to him, pleaded with him for a return to cleaner values.
The Universe is God's. It is one thing, a wholeness against which all separations may be identified. Transient life, even that self-aware and reasoning life which we call sentient, holds only fragile trusteeship on any portion of the wholeness.
We don't need any more Atreides gods! We need a space for some humanity!
In the Bene Gesserit Way, he opened his mind to Jacurutu, seeking to know nothing about it. Knowing was a barrier which prevented learning. For a few moments he allowed himself merely to resonate, making no demands, asking no questions.
The human mind, as is the case with the mind of any animal, is a resonator. It responds to resonances in the environment.
In doing good, avoid notoriety; in doing evil, avoid self-awareness.
There's no mighty seat of reason which dwells within the brain. Creation is discovery. God discovered us in the Void because we moved against a background which He already knew. The wall was blank. Then there was movement.
“Many forces sought control of the Atreides twins and, when the death of Leto was announced, this movement of plot and counterplot was amplified. Note the relative motivations: the Sisterhood feared Alia, an adult Abomination, but still wanted those genetic characteristics carried by the Atreides. The Church hierarchy of Auquaf and Hajj saw only the power implicit in control of Muad'Dib's heir. CHOAM wanted a doorway to the wealth of Dune. Farad'n and his Sardaukar sought a return to glory for House Corrino. The Spacing Guild feared the equation Arrakis = melange; without the spice they could not navigate. Jessica wished to repair what her disobedience to the Bene Gesserit had created. Few thought to ask the twins what their plans might be, until it was too late.
I come only to ask a simple question. Is Muad'Dib's death to be followed by the moral suicide of all men? Is that the inevitable aftermath of a Messiah?
I choose to ally myself against any force which brings humiliation upon humankind.
The sandy juice of his fears could not be avoided.
The assumption that a whole system can be made to work better through an assault on its conscious elements betrays a dangerous ignorance. This has often been the ignorant approach of those who call themselves scientists and technologists.
Power attracts the psychotics. Always. That's what we have to avoid within ourselves.
To be sighted in the land of the blind carries its own perils. If you try to interpret what you see for the blind, you tend to forget that the blind possess an inherent movement conditioned by their blindness. They are like a monstrous machine moving along its own path. They have their own momentum, their own fixations. I fear the blind, Stil. I fear them. They can so easily crush anything in their path.
Our civilization could well die of indifference within it before succumbing to external attack.
Why deify a man known to be flesh?
“Mentats share the fallibilities of those who use them,” she said. “The human mind, as is the case with the mind of any animal, is a resonator. It responds to resonances in the environment. The mentat has learned to extend his awareness across many parallel loops of causality and to proceed along those loops for long chains of consequences” 
Tleilaxu eyes were not immune to tears.
They were a magnet in the void; evil and all the sad misuses of power collected around them.
He thought: Jessica, mother of Muad'Dib and grandmother of these royal twins, returns to our planet today. Why does she end her self-imposed exile at this time? Why does she leave the softness and security of Caladan for the dangers of Arrakis?
A victory is useless unless it reflects your deepest wishes.
In the strictures of Arrakis, human flesh remains the most durable and reliable resource for the Hajj. Perhaps it is the implicit awareness of this fact which makes Arrakis the ultimate mirror of the soul.
Fremen possessed a highly evolved conscience which centered on their own welfare as a people. It was only to outsiders that they seemed brutish — just as outsiders appeared brutish to Fremen. Every Fremen knew very well that he could do a brutal thing and feel no guilt.
We are one life reaching out into a dark future.
To be a god can ultimately become boring and degrading. There'd be reason enough for the invention of free will! A god might wish to escape into sleep and be alive only in the unconscious projections of his dream-creatures.
Ignorance reduces the shock of some experiences.
In the old ways and old religions, there'd been no future, only an endless now.
Lady Jessica ordered you to differentiate between the wolf and the dog, between ze'ed and ke'leb. By her definition a wolf is someone with power who misuses that power. However, between wolf and dog there is a dawn period when you cannot distinguish between them.
Knowledge, you see, has no uses without purpose, but purpose is what builds enclosing walls.
For all of those years since birth they had been as one person. But their plan demanded now that they undergo a metamorphosis, going their separate ways into uniqueness where the sharing of daily experiences would never again unite them as they once had been united.
It's an old, old trick of autocratic rule. Good subjects must feel guilty. The guilt begins as a feeling of failure. The good autocrat provides many opportunities for failure in the populace.
The human quest for this interdependent order and our niche within it represents a profound necessity. The quest can, however, be perverted into a conservative grip on sameness. This has always proved deadly for the entire system.
Muad'Dib's teachings have become the playground of scholastics, of the superstitious and the corrupt. He taught a balanced way of life, a philosophy with which a human can meet problems arising from an ever-changing universe. He said humankind is still evolving, in a process which will never end. He said this evolution moves on changing principles which are known only to eternity. How can corrupted reasoning play with such an essence?
“What... does he plan?” “The Golden Path. He'll explain it to you later.” 
Arrakeen had become an ungenerous place, a contained place, unreasonable and self-righteous in its harsh outlines.
Every people subjugated by the jihad now dreams of a leader to come.
The Atreides off-planet retaliation system would be joined by overwhelming force, and no need to summon any of them. Fear would do the calling. Salusa Secundus and its allies would vanish in hot clouds.
Oh, I don't imply that I've made my father's mistake and peered into the future with a glass of spice.
Peace has only one meaning in this Imperium. It's the maintenance of a single way of life.
Indeed, the young women of Arrakis were very beautiful that year. And the young men, too.
When we think we know something, that's precisely the moment when we should look deeper into the thing.
Freedom is a lonely state.
If one delays old age or death by the use of melange or by that learned adjustment of fleshly balance which you Bene Gesserits so rightly fear, such a delay invokes only an illusion of control. Whether one walks rapidly through the sietch or slowly, one traverses the sietch. And that passage of time is experienced internally.
All proofs inevitably lead to propositions which have no proof! All things are known because we want to believe in them.
Guilt and blame grew defuse when memory covered a millennia.
To exist is to stand out, away from the background.
“Choose a good worm,” she said, giving him the Fremen words of parting.
The universe neither threatens nor promises. It holds things beyond our sway: the fall of a meteor, the eruption of a spiceblow, growing old and dying. These are the realities of this universe and they must be faced regardless of how you feel about them. You cannot fend off such realities with words. They will come at you in their own wordless way and then, then you will understand what is meant by “life and death.” 
The climate of these northern latitudes was growing warmer; atmospheric carbon dioxide was on the increase.
They yawned and stretched in secret unison in their adjoining chambers.
For proper government, the tribe must have ways to choose men whose lives reflect the way a government should behave.
She was Bene Gesserit long before she was my mother. Duncan, she permitted her own son, my brother, to undergo the test of the gom jabbar! She arranged it! And she knew he might not survive it!
How easy it is to follow our thoughts instead of our senses.
I give you the desert chameleon, whose ability to blend itself into the background tells you all you need to know about the roots of ecology and the foundations of a personal identity.
I hear the wind blowing across the desert and I see the moons of a winter night rising like great ships in the void. To them I make my vow: I will be resolute and make an art of government; I will balance my inherited past and become a perfect storehouse of my relic memories. And I will be known for kindliness more than for knowledge. My face will shine down the corridors of time for as long as humans exist.
The life of a single human, as the life of a family or an entire people, persists as memory. My people must come to see this as part of their maturing process. They are people as organism, and in this persistent memory they store more and more experiences in a subliminal reservoir. Humankind hopes to call upon this material if it is needed for a changing universe. But much that is stored can be lost in that chance play of accident which we call "fate." Much may not be integrated into evolutionary relationships, and thus many may not be evaluated and keyed into activity by those ongoing environmental changes which inflict themselves upon flesh. The species can forget! This is the special value of the Kwisatz Haderach which the Bene Gesserits never suspected: the Kwisatz Haderach cannot forget.
God's command comes; so seek not to hasten it. God's it is to show the way; and some do swerve from it.
Some actions have an end but no beginning; some begin but do not end. It all depends upon where the observer is standing.
Not knowing what you said, you said it.
Travail and persecution are the lot of all who follow me.
It is said that the only fear we cannot correct is the fear of our own mistakes.
Often there's no need to tear off an arm to remove a splinter.
One of us had to accept the agony, and he was always the stronger.
He had achieved harmony simply by accepting it.
You know it's love when you want to give joy and damn the consequences.
What is the most profound difference between us, between you and me? You already know it. It's these ancestral memories. Mine come at me in the full glare of awareness. Yours work from your blind side. Some call it instinct or fate. The memories apply their leverages to each of us - on what we think and what we do. You think you are immune to such influences? I am Galileo. I stand here and tell you: "Yet it moves." That which moves can exert its force in ways no mortal power ever before dared stem. I am here to dare this.
The machine cannot anticipate every problem of importance to humans. It is the difference between serial bits and an unbroken continuum. We have the one; machines are confined to the other.
Let there be no doubt that I am the assemblage of our ancestors, the arena in which they exercise my moments. They are my cells and I am their body. This is the fravashi of which I speak, the soul, the collective unconscious, the source of archetypes, the repository of all trauma and joy. I am the choice of their awakening. My samhadi is their samhadi. Their experiences are mine! Their knowledge distilled is my inheritance. Those billions are my one.
The realization of what I am occurs in the timeless awareness which does not stimulate nor delude. I create a field without self or center, a field where even death becomes only analogy. I desire no results. I merely permit this field which has no goals nor desires, no perfections nor even visions of achievements. In that field, omnipresent primal awareness is all. It is the light which pours through the windows of my universe.
What is the most immediate danger to my stewardship? I will tell you. It is a true visionary, a person who has stood in the presence of God with the full knowledge of where he stands. Visionary ecstasy releases energies which are like energies of sex — uncaring for anything except creation. One act of creation can be much like another. Everything depends upon the vision.
I give you eons of life which slips gently toward death without fuss or stirring, without even asking 'Why?' I show you the false happiness and the shadow-catastrophe called Leto, the God Emperor. Now, will you learn the real happiness?
I pray, therefore, that when you have traversed my portion of the Golden Path you no longer will be innocent children dancing to music you cannot hear.
Some believe, that you must compromise integrity with a certain amount of dirty work before you can put genius to work. They say the compromise begins when you come out of the sanctus intending to realize your ideals. Moneo says my solution is to stay within the sanctus, sending others to do my dirty work.
I have created what I intended-a powerful spiritual tension throughout my Empire. Few sense the strength of it. With what energies did I create this condition? I am not that strong. The only power I possess is the control of individual prosperity. That is the sum of all the things I do. Then why do people seek my presence for other reasons? What could lead them to certain death in the futile attempt to reach my presence? Do they want to be saints? Do they think that thus they gain the vision of God?
You think power may be the most unstable of all human achievements? Then what of the apparent exceptions to this inherent instability? Some families endure. Very powerful religious bureaucracies have been known to endure. Consider the relationship between faith and power. Are they mutually exclusive when each depends upon the other? The Bene Gesserit have been reasonably secure within the loyal walls of faith for thousands of years. But where has their power gone?
My Uncle Malky always said the Lord Leto never responded to prayer. He said the Lord Leto looked on prayer as attempted coercion, a form of violence against the chosen god, telling the immortal what to do: Give me a miracle, God, or I won't believe in you!
I am all of God that need be seen. I am the word become a miracle. I am all of my ancestors. Is that not miracle enough? What more could you possibly want? Ask yourself: Where is there a greater miracle?
What am I? The ultimate loner forced to look at what might have been. Every day I look at it...
Your original unselfish choice fills you now with selfishness.
The defiling of a god is an ancient human tradition. Why should I be an exception?
As long as there is life, every ending is a beginning. And I would save humankind, even from itself. This is why no death in the perpetuation of humankind can be a complete failure. This is why a birth touches us so deeply. This is why the most tragic death is the death of a youth.
We are primal elements linking one piece of Time to another. And when we have passed, everything behind us will drop off into no-sound, a place like the no-room of the Ixians, yet never again the same as it was before we came.
Most discipline is hidden discipline, designed not to liberate but to limit. Do not ask Why? Be cautious with How? Why? leads inexorably to paradox. How? traps you in a universe of cause and effect. Both deny the infinite.
While you cause a granular universe to persist in your awareness, you are blind to movement. When things change, your absolute universe vanishes, no longer accessible to your self-limiting perceptions. The universe has moved beyond you.
This is the awe-inspiring universe of magic: There are no atoms, only waves and motions all around. Here, you discard all belief in barriers to understanding. You put aside understanding itself. This universe cannot be seen, cannot be heard, cannot be detected in any way by fixed perceptions. It is the ultimate void where no preordained screens occur upon which forms may be projected. You have only one awareness here — the screen of the magi: Imagination! Here, you learn what it is to be human. You are a creator of order, of beautiful shapes and systems, an organizer of chaos.
There was a man who sat each day looking out through a narrow vertical opening where a single board had been removed from a wooden fence. Each day a wild ass of the desert passed outside the fence and across the narrow opening — first the nose, then the head, the forelegs, the long brown back, the hindlegs, and lastly the tail. One day the man leaped to his feet with a light of discovery in his eyes and he shouted for all who could hear him: "It is obvious! The nose causes the tail!"
We are not looking at a new state of matter but at a newly recognized relationship between consciousness and matter, which provides a more penetrating insight into the workings of prescience. The oracle shapes a projected inner universe to produce new external probabilities out of forces that are not understood. There is no need to understand these forces before using them to shape the physical universe. Ancient metal workers had no need to understand the molecular and submolecular complexities of their steel, bronze, copper, gold, and tin. They invented mystical powers to describe the unknown while they continued to operate their forges and wield their hammers.
The person who takes the banal and ordinary and illuminates it in a new way can terrify. We do not want our ideas changed. We feel threatened by such demands. "I already know the important things!" we say. Then Changer comes and throws our old ideas away.
No sweeteners will cloak some forms of bitterness. If it tastes bitter, spit it out. That's what our earliest ancestors did.
Enter no conflict against fanatics unless you can defuse them. Oppose a religion with another religion only if your proofs (miracles) are irrefutable or if you can mesh in a way that the fanatics accept you as god-inspired.
We witness a passing phase of eternity. Important things happen but some people never notice. Accidents intervene. You are not present at episodes. You depend on reports. And people shutter their minds. What good are reports? History in a news account? Preselected at an editorial conference, digested and excreted by prejudice? Accounts you need seldom come from those who make history. Diaries, memoirs and autobiographies are subjective forms of special pleading. Archives are crammed with such suspect stuff.
Intelligence takes chance with limited data in an arena where mistakes are not only possible but also necessary.
Thinking you know why you behave as you do gives you all sorts of excuses for extraordinary behavior.
And here lay the magical enticement of prescience, the lure to which Muad'Dib and his Tyrant son had succumbed. The oracle knows what is to come!